1900: Galveston Hurricane kills 8000 people. Indian famine ends.
1901: Boxer Rebellion ends. Death of Queen Victoria. Platt Amendment limits the autonomy of Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of US troops.
1902: Second Boer War ends. Philippine–American War ends. Cuba gains independence from the United States. Unification of Saudi Arabia begins.
1903: First controlled heavier-than-air flight of the Wright Brothers. Herero and Namaqua Genocide, the first genocide of the 20th century, begins in German South-West Africa. In Russia the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks form from the breakup of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party. Pius X becomes Pope. The teddy bear is invented.
1904: Entente cordiale signed between Britain and France. Russo-Japanese War begins. Trans-Siberian railway is completed. Construction of the Panama Canal begins. Roger Casement publishes his account of Belgian atrocities in the Congo Free State.
1905: Russo-Japanese War ends; 1905 Revolution in Russia. Trans-Siberian Railway opened. Albert Einstein's formulation of relativity. Schlieffen Plan proposed. Las Vegas founded. The British Indian Province of Bengal, was partitioned by the Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon.
1906: Earthquakes in San Francisco, California (death toll: 3000) and Valparaíso, Chile (death toll: 20,000) occur. Dreyfus Affair ends. Stolypin reform in Russia creates a new class of affluent kulaks. Brazilian inventor Alberto Santos-Dumont takes off and flies his 14-bis to a crowd in Paris. The Muslim League is formed by Nawab Salimullah Khan of Dacca.
1907: Herero and Namaqua Genocide ends. A peasants' revolt in Romania kills roughly 11,000. The Indian National Congress splits into two factions at its Surat session, presided by Rash Behari Bose.
1908: First commercial radio transmissions. The Ford Motor Company invents the assembly line. Boy Scouts founded. First commercial Middle-Eastern oilfield established, at Masjid-al-Salaman in southwest Persia. The Tunguska event (later conjectured to be a meteorite strike) devastates thousands of square kilometres of Siberia. Young Turk Revolution in the Ottoman Empire. Independence of Bulgaria. Pu Yi, the last Emperor of China, assumes the throne.
1909: Independence of Panama. United States troops leave Cuba.
1910: Beginning of the Mexican Revolution. George V becomes King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions and Emperor of India. Union of South Africa created. Portugal abolishes its Monarchy. Imperial Japan annexes Korea.
1911: Roald Amundsen first reaches the South Pole. New Delhi becomes the capital of British India. Ernest Rutherford identifies the atomic nucleus. The British Indian Province of Bengal is reunified
1912: Republic of China established and ends the Chinese Empire. The African National Congress is founded. Morocco becomes a protectorate of France. Sinking of the RMS Titanic. Balkan Wars begin. Woodrow Wilson is elected 28th President of the United States. Arizona becomes the last state to be admitted to the continental Union.
1913: Niels Bohr formulates the first cohesive model of the atomic nucleus, and in the process paves the way to quantum mechanics. Balkan Wars end. George I of Greece is assassinated.
1914: Gavrilo Princip assassinates the Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, triggering World War I. Panama Canal opens. Benedict XV becomes Pope. Martha, last known passenger pigeon, dies.
1915: The RMS Lusitania is sunk. The United States occupation of Haiti begins. Armenian genocide in the Ottoman Empire.
1916: Easter Rising in Ireland. The implementation of daylight saving time. Warlord Era begins in China. David Lloyd George becomes the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The Gallipoli Campaign fails. Battle of the Somme. Grigory Rasputin is assassinated by H.H. Prince Felix Youssoupov. The Pact is agreed upon by both the Congress and the Muslim League at the Indian city of Lucknow.
1917: Russian Revolution; beginning of Russian Civil War. USA join the Allies for the last 17 months of World War I. Independence of Poland recognised. The first Pulitzer Prizes are awarded.
1918: End of World War I; Spanish flu pandemic. Murder of Tsar Nicholas II and his family. Poland, Ukraine and Belarus are among a number of states to declare independence from Russia. Finnish Civil War. Mehmed VI becomes last Sultan of the Ottoman Empire. The Kingdom of Iceland and The State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs are established. The British occupy Palestine.
1919: Treaty of Versailles redraws European borders and establishes the Weimar Republic in Germany. Victory for Estonia in the Estonian War of Independence. League of Nations founded in Paris. Polish-Soviet War begins. The Italian National Fascist Party is established by Benito Mussolini. Comintern established. Egyptian Revolution of 1919. Turkish War of Independence begins. The International Labor Organisation is established. Ernest Rutherford discovers the proton. First experimental evidence for the General theory of relativity obtained by Arthur Eddington.
1920: Mexican Revolution ends. Greece restores its monarchy after a referendum.
1921: Irish Free State is established, while the Province of Northern Ireland is created within The United Kingdom. Adolf Hitler becomes Führer of the Nazi Party as hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic begins. Russia invades Georgia. End of Russian Civil War and Polish-Soviet War. Coup brings the Pahlavi dynasty to power in Iran.
1922: The Italian reconquest of Libya begins. The union of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador is dissolved. Egypt gains independence. March on Rome brings Benito Mussolini to power in Italy. Howard Carter discovers Tutankhamen's tomb. The Irish Civil War begins. Ottoman Empire is abolished. Gabriel Narutowicz, President of Poland is assassinated. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) is formed. Pius XI becomes Pope. James Joyce publishes Ulysses. The Washington Naval Treaty is signed. Mohandas Gandhi launches Non-cooperation movement.
1923: Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic ends with the introduction of the Rentenmark. Time Magazine is first published. Irish Civil War ends. The Beer Hall Putsch, an attempt to overthrow the Weimar Republic, ends in failure and brief imprisonment for Adolf Hitler but brings the Nazi Party to national attention. A military coup ousts and kills Bulgarian Prime Minister Aleksandar Stamboliyski. The Great Kantō earthquake kills at least 105,000 people in Japan. Ankara replaces Istanbul as the capital of Turkey, while Kemal Atatürk becomes the first President of the newly established Republic of Turkey. The Walt Disney Company is founded.
1924: Death of Vladimir Lenin. The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation founded under J. Edgar Hoover. The August Uprising in Georgia against Soviet rule. George Gershwin composes Rhapsody In Blue. U.S. Immigration Act of 1924 significantly restricts immigration from Asia, the Middle East, and Southern Europe.
1925: Benito Mussolini gains dictatorial powers in Italy. Mein Kampf is published. First televisual image created by John Logie Baird. Locarno Treaties are signed.
1926: Hirohito becomes Emperor of Japan. Coups in Greece, Poland and Portugal install new dictatorships.
1927: The Jazz Singer, the first "talkie", is released. Joseph Stalin becomes leader of the Soviet Union. World population reaches 2 billion. Australian Parliament convenes in Canberra for the first time. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland officially becomes the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Saudi Arabia gains independence. The BBC is granted a Royal Charter in the United Kingdom.
1928: Discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming. Warlord Era ends in China. Malta becomes a British Dominion. King Zog I is crowned in Albania. The Kellogg-Briand Pact is signed in Paris. The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is established. Mickey Mouse is created at the Walt Disney Studio.
1929: Wall Street crash of 1929 and the beginning of the Great Depression. First people sent to the gulag in the Soviet Union. Pope Pius XI signs the Lateran Treaty with Italian leader Benito Mussolini. Vatican City is recognised as a sovereign state. The first Academy Awards are presented.
1930: Aided by the Great Depression, the Nazi Party increases its share of the vote from 2.6% to 18.3%. Clyde Tombaugh discovers Pluto. Salt March by Mohandas Gandhi and the official start of civil disobedience in British India. Military coups replace governments in Peru and Brazil. Haile Selassie becomes king of Abyssinia. First FIFA World Cup hosted.
1931: Floods in China kill up to 2.5 million people. Independence of South Africa. Construction of the Empire State Building. "The Star-Spangled Banner" is adopted as the United States's national anthem. The Second Spanish Republic is declared. The Chinese Soviet Republic is proclaimed by Mao Zedong. Statute of Westminster creates the British Commonwealth of Nations. Japan invades Manchuria, China and occupies it until the end of World War II.
1932: Franklin D. Roosevelt becomes President of the United States. Éamon de Valera becomes President of the Executive Council (prime minister) of the Irish Free State. The Nazi party becomes the largest single party in the German parliament. Military coup in Chile. BBC World Service starts broadcasting. The Neutron is discovered.
1933: Adolf Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany. New Deal begins in America. Japan and Germany announce they are going to leave the League of Nations.
1934: Dictatorships begin in Brazil and Bolivia. Mao Zedong begins the Long March. United States occupation of Haiti ends. United States grants more autonomy to the Philippines. Adolf Hitler becomes Fuhrer of Germany.
1935: Second Italo-Abyssinian War concludes with the exile of Haile Selassie and the conquest of Abyssinia by Benito Mussolini. Persia becomes Iran. William Lyon Mackenzie King is elected Prime Minister of Canada.
1936: Beginning of the Spanish Civil War. Great Purge begins under Stalin. Edward VIII becomes King of the British Commonwealth and Emperor of India, before abdicating and handing the throne to his brother, George VI. Hoover Dam is completed. Arab Revolt in Palestine against the British begins to oppose Jewish immigration. Italy annexes Ethiopia. "Benjamin", the last known thylacine, dies in Hobart Zoo.
1937: Japanese invasion of China, and the beginning of World War II in the Far East. Rape of Nanking. Neville Chamberlain becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The Irish Republican Army attempts to assassinate King George VI of the United Kingdom. Deaths of George Gershwin and Maurice Ravel.
1938: Munich agreement hands Czechoslovakia to Nazi Germany. Great Purge ends after nearly 700,000 executions. Kristallnacht in Germany, while Time Magazine declares Adolf Hitler as Man of the Year. DC Comics hero Superman has its first appearance.
1939: End of Spanish Civil War; Francisco Franco becomes dictator of Spain. Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union. Nazi invasion of Poland triggers the beginning of World War II in Europe. Palestinian revolt against the British ends. Pius XII becomes Pope.
1940: Nazis invade France, the Netherlands, Denmark and Norway. Katyn massacre in Poland. Winter War between Soviet Union and Finland. Winston Churchill becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Battle of Britain as the British Empire fights alone against the Axis Powers. The Blitz begins.
1941: Operation Reinhard commences the main phase of the Holocaust. Bombing of Pearl Harbor, which leads to the USA joining World War II. Hitler commences the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union
1942: Battle of Midway. Battle of the Coral Sea. First and second Battles of El Alamein. Battle of Stalingrad. Guadalcanal Campaign begins. Internment of Japanese-American citizens in the US begins. Manhattan Project begins.
1943: Battle of Stalingrad ends with retreat of the German Army. Warsaw Ghetto uprising. Green Revolution begins.
1944: D-Day landings. Baltic states are annexed by the Soviet Union. First operational electronic computer, Colossus, comes online
1945: Bombing of Dresden. Battle of Berlin. End of World War II. The Holocaust ends after ~12 million deaths, including 6 million Jews. Deaths of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini. Creation of the atomic bomb, and the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Potsdam Conference divides Europe into Western and Soviet blocs. United Nations founded. Chinese Civil War begins. Independence of Korea. Deaths of Anne Frank and Béla Bartók.
1946: Independence of Jordan. Nuremberg trials end. First Indochina War begins. First images taken of the Earth from space.
1947: Independence of India and Pakistan and beginning of First Indo-Pakistani War. Breaking of the sound barrier. Creation of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
1948: Arab-Israeli War. Berlin Airlift. Marshall Plan; founding of the OECD and the World Health Organization; assassination of Mohandas Gandhi; the independence of Burma. Beginning of apartheid in South Africa. Division of North and South Korea. First Indo-Pakistani War ends.
1949: Creation of NATO. Blockade of Berlin ends. Partition of Germany into the Soviet socialist German Democratic Republic and the NATO-backed Federal Republic of Germany. COMECON founded by USSR and the Eastern Bloc. Partition of Kashmir. End of the Chinese Civil War and establishment of the People's Republic of China. Independence of Indonesia.
1950: Beginning of the Korean War. Lhamo Dondrub becomes the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet.
1951: Colombo Plan comes into effect.
1952: European Defence Community formed; Queen Elizabeth II becomes Monarch of the Commonwealth realms. Bonn–Paris conventions end allied occupation of West Germany. Slansky Trial in Czechoslovakia. Detonation of the hydrogen bomb. First scheduled flight by commercial jet. Development of the first effective polio vaccine by Jonas Salk. Mau Mau Uprising begins in Kenya.
1953: Independence of Cambodia. Discovery of DNA. First ascent of Mount Everest; Mohammed Mossadeq deposed in Iran; end of the Korean War. Death of Joseph Stalin. Elvis Presley's musical career is launched.
1954: Supreme Court of the United States decides Brown v. Board of Education, ordering an end to racial segregation in public schools. Rock Around the Clock by Bill Haley and His Comets, brings rock and roll to the American mainstream. The Soviet Union generates first electricity by nuclear power. First Indochina War ends; Algerian War begins.
1955: Signing of the Warsaw Pact. First Sudanese Civil War begins. Antimatter first produced.
1956: Independence of Sudan and Tunisia and full independence of Pakistan. The Hungarian Uprising; the Suez crisis. Brasilia constructed.
1957: Launch of Sputnik 1 and the beginning of the Space Age; independence of Ghana; Treaty of Rome, which would eventually lead to the European Union; Harold Macmillan become British Prime Minister; first prescription of the combined oral contraceptive pill.
1958: Great Leap Forward begins in China. NASA, the U.S. Federal Aviation Authority and Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) founded. CND's symbol, the peace sign, is first used. Invention of the optical disc and the cassette tape.
1959: Cuban Revolution; independence of Cyprus and Singapore; admission of Alaska and Hawaii into the United States; Dalai Lama exiled from Tibet; first documented AIDS cases; beginning of the Vietnam War; first images of the far side of the Moon. By this time, the gulag has been effectively disbanded, after over a million recorded deaths.World population reaches 3 billion.
1960: European Free Trade Association formed; 1960 U-2 incident sparks deterioration in relations between superpowers; Year of Africa. Independence of Somalia, Togo and the Belgian Congo (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo). Congo Crisis. Mau Mau Uprising ends; first manned descent to the deepest point on Earth, the Mariana Trench; construction of the first laser; world population reaches 3 billion. The Beatles is formed in Liverpool.
1961: Great Leap Forward ends in China after the deaths of roughly 20 million people. Building of the Berlin Wall; first human spaceflight
1962: Cuban missile crisis; Algerian war ends with the independence of Algeria; The Beatles' first record. Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation begins. Sino-Indian War.
1963: Independence of Kenya; creation of Malaysia; Martin Luther King delivers his "I have a Dream" speech. Assassination of John F. Kennedy. Launch of the first geostationary satellite. Paul VI becomes Pope
1964: Independence of Malta, Malawi and Tanzania; Civil Rights Act of 1964 abolishes segregation in the USA. Colombian armed conflict begins. First close-up images of Mars
1965: Deaths of Winston Churchill and Malcolm X. Anti-Communist purge in Indonesia kills up to 500,000 people. Second Indo-Pakistani War.
1966: Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation ends. China's Cultural Revolution begins. Independence of Lesotho, Botswana and Barbados
1967: Summer of Love; Six Day War
1968: Assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert F. Kennedy. Prague Spring. May 1968 protests in France. The Troubles begin in Northern Ireland.
1969: Moon landings; Woodstock festival; creation of ARPANET, the earliest incarnation of the Internet. Muammar Gaddafi overthrows King Idris of Libya in a Coup d'état and establishes the Libyan Arab Republic.
1970: Edward Heath becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Polish 1970 protests. Cambodian Civil War begins. Ratification of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Containerisation adopted globally, massively boosting global trade. Maiden flight of the Boeing 747. Bhola Cyclone kills 500,000 people in East Pakistan. Deaths of Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin. FLQ seizes hostages, causing Prime Minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau of Canada to issue the War Measures Act
1971: Bangladesh Liberation War ends in independence of Bangladesh from Pakistan and precipitates Third Indo-Pakistani War. Internment begins in Northern Ireland. Invention of the microchip. Idi Amin comes to power in Uganda
1972: Northern Ireland's Bloody Sunday; First Sudanese Civil War ends. Martial law declared in the Philippines by President Ferdinand E. Marcos.
1973: Beginning of the Watergate scandal. The Supreme Court of the United States decides Roe v. Wade. Death of Pablo Picasso. First close-up images of Jupiter
1974: Turkish occupation of Cyprus. Carnation Revolution in Portugal begins transition to democracy. First close-up images of Mercury. Discovery of "Lucy" (Australopithecus afarensis) in Ethiopia's Olduvai Gorge. World population reaches 4 billion.
1975: End of the Vietnam War; deaths of Francisco Franco and Dmitri Shostakovich. Cambodian Civil War ends with victory for the Khmer Rouge. The Killing Fields murders begin. First Cricket World Cup hosted.
1976: First outbreak of the Ebola virus. Death of Mao Zedong. End of Cultural Revolution. Steve Jobs finishes his first significant invention, Apple I.
1977: Introduction of the first mass-produced personal computers; launch of the Voyager spacecraft, currently the most distant man-made objects in the universe. Queen Alia of Jordan is killed in helicopter crash.
1978: Invention of artificial insulin; discovery of Pluto's moon Charon. Independence of Tuvalu. Birth of the first test-tube baby. Cambodian-Vietnamese War begins. Afghan Civil War begins. Deng Xiaoping commences Economic reform in the People's Republic of China. Spanish transition to democracy is completed. John Paul I and then John Paul II become Pope.
1979: Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Iranian Revolution and Iran hostage crisis; Shah Reza Pahlavi forced into exile. Arrival of Pope John Paul II in Poland, eventually sparking the Solidarity movement. First space station, Skylab, is launched. First close-up images of Saturn. Margaret Thatcher becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Implementation of China's One child policy. Idi Amin exiled from Uganda. Smallpox eradicated. Cambodian-Vietnamese War ends with the overthrow of Cambodia's Khmer Rouge regime. 1.7 million people known to have been murdered in The Killing Fields. Sino-Vietnamese War. Nicaraguan Revolution.
1980: Independence of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu. Ronald Reagan is elected President of the United States. Beginning of the Iran-Iraq War, Salvadorian Civil War and Contra War. Death of John Lennon.
1981: Independence of Palau. First orbital flight of the Space Shuttle.
1982: First Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Falklands War. Hama massacre in Syria leads to more than 10,000 deaths.
1983: End of 1982 Lebanon War. GPS becomes available for civilian use. Independence of Brunei. End of dictatorship in Argentina. Second Sudanese Civil War begins.Invasion of Grenada by the United States.
1984: Beginning of the 1984–1985 famine in Ethiopia
1985: Live Aid. Mikhail Gorbachev becomes Premier of the Soviet Union. First use of DNA fingerprinting. End of dictatorship in Brazil
1986: Challenger and Chernobyl disasters. Launch of the space station Mir. First close up images of the planet Uranus. Return of Halley's Comet. End of dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines. Iran-Contra becomes public. Assassination of Olof Palme.
1987: Stock market crash of 1987. First Intifada between Israel and Palestine begins. World population reaches 5 billion
1988: Perestroika begins. End of the Iran-Iraq War. End of dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet in Chile. Pan Am Flight 103 falls over Lockerbie, Scotland. Myanmar Armed Forces launch a military coup. Construction of the Channel Tunnel begins.
1989: Fall of the Berlin Wall; 1989 revolution and collapse of the Soviet Bloc in Europe. Tiannanmen Square Massacre in China. End of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. End of dictatorship in Paraguay and first direct Presidential election in Brazil since 1960. Death of Emperor Hirohito. Fatwa issued against Salman Rushdie. Exxon Valdez oil spill. First close up pictures of Neptune. First Liberian Civil War begins.
1990: Sir Tim Berners-Lee invents the World Wide Web. Reunification of Germany. Launch of the Hubble Space Telescope. Gulf War begins. Contra War ends. Myanmar Armed Forces place Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest.
1991: Gulf War ends. Dissolution of the Soviet Union and independence of 15 former Soviet republics. Boris Yeltsin becomes the first President of the Russian Federation. Ten-Day War in Slovenia begins the Yugoslav Wars. Beginning of the Somali, Sierra Leonian and Algerian Civil Wars. Final end of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia
1992: Maastricht Treaty creates the European Union. Bill Clinton is elected President of the United States. End of dictatorship in Albania and South Korea. End of Salvadorian Civil War
1993: Velvet divorce between Czech Republic and Slovakia. Independence of Eritrea. Oslo accords end First Intifada between Israel and Palestine.
1994: End of apartheid in South Africa and election of Nelson Mandela. Establishment of NAFTA. First Chechen War begins. Assassination of Juvénal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira triggers the Rwandan genocide. Opening of the Channel Tunnel.
1995: Establishment of the World Trade Organization. Srebrenica massacre; NATO bombing raids in Bosnia; Dayton Accords signed. Assassination of Yitzhak Rabin. North Korean famine begins.
1996: American terrorist Timmothy McVeigh bombs the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. First Congo War begins. First Chechen War ends. First Liberian Civil War ends. End of dictatorship in Taiwan. Dolly the sheep becomes the first successful cloned mammal. The Taliban government takes control of Afghanistan.
1997: Tony Blair becomes Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong from UK to China. Lottery Uprising in Albania. Diana, Princess of Wales is killed in a car accident in Paris.
1998: Osama Bin Laden publishes a fatwa against the West. Kenya and Tanzania bombings. Second Congo War begins. Good Friday Agreement brings an end to The Troubles in Northern Ireland. North Korean famine kills an estimated 2.5 million people by this point.
1999: Euro is introduced. Kosovo War ends the Yugoslav Wars. Hugo Chavez becomes President of Venezuela. Second Chechen War and Second Liberian Civil War begin. Fourth Indo-Pakistani War. Crisis in East Timor leads to 1400 deaths. Columbine High School massacre in Colorado, USA. World population reaches 6 billion.