2000: End of Israeli occupation of Lebanon. Second Intifada begins. George W. Bush is elected President of the United States. Vincente Fox becomes the first opposition President of Mexico. Vladimir Putin becomes President of Russia. British Army launch Operation Palliser which effectively ends the Sierra Leone Civil War. International Space Station begins operations. First Inter-Korean Summit. al-Qaeda suicide bombs the USS Cole.
2001: 9/11 attacks destroy the World Trade Center in New York, damage the Pentagon in Washington, DC. War on Terror declared. Afghan War begins. Wikipedia founded. President Joseph Estrada of the Philippines impeached.
2002: 2002 Bali bombings. Chechen rebels seize theatre in Moscow. America demands Iraq allow unfettered access to weapons inspectors. Guantanamo Bay detention camp is established. Algerian Civil War ends. Rose Revolution in Georgia. Independence of East Timor.
2003: Iraq War begins, triggering worldwide protests. War in Darfur begins. The Human Genome Project is completed. Second Congo War ends with more than 5 million dead. Second Liberian Civil War ends. Space Shuttle Columbia is destroyed on re-entry.
2004: Enlargement of NATO and the European Union incorporates most of former Eastern Bloc. Madrid train bombings. Orange Revolution in Ukraine. Beslan school hostage crisis. Boxing Day Tsunami occurs in Indian Ocean, leading to the deaths of 230,000.
2005: IRA end military campaign in Northern Ireland. 7/7 attacks on London Underground. Angela Merkel becomes Germany's first woman Chancellor; Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan. Second Intifada ends. Israel withdraws from Gaza; Cedar Revolution in Lebanon. Second Sudanese Civil War ends. Hurricane Katrina kills nearly 2000 people in the Gulf of Mexico. 80,000 are killed in an earthquake in Kashmir. The Kyoto Protocol comes into effect. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad becomes President of Iran. Benedict XVI becomes Pope.
2006: Independence of Montenegro. Second invasion of Lebanon. Mumbai bombings. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf becomes President of Liberia, and thus Africa's first elected female head of state. Execution of Saddam Hussein. The Baiji, the Yangtze river dolphin, becomes functionally extinct.
2007: Anti-government protests in Myanmar crushed by ruling junta. Spike in food prices and subprime crisis help trigger the Great Recession. Assassination of Benazir Bhutto.
2008: End of Monarchy in Nepal. Barack Obama is elected President of the United States. Cyclone Nargis kills 133,000 in Myanmar. Gaza War begins. 2008 South Ossetia war. Kosovo declares independence, to mixed reaction. Battle of Basra - Iraqi forces crack down on Muqtada al Sadr's Mahdi forces in Basra and Sadr City. Ireland rejects treaty of Lisbon.
2009: Gaza War ends; Gaza blockade continues. Election protests begin in Iran. Second Chechen War ends. Death of Michael Jackson. Burj Khalifa in Dubai, the world's tallest skyscraper, is completed. Great Recession officially ends. Formation of BRICS economic bloc. Treaty of Lisbon ratified.